# TableFormer: Table Structure Understanding with Transformers.

Ahmed Nassar, Nikolaos Livathinos, Maksym Lysak, Peter Staar
IBM Research
{ahn,nli,mly,taa}@zurich.ibm.com

Abstract

Tables organize valuable content in a concise and com-
pact representation. This content is extremely valuable for
systems such as search engines, Knowledge Graph's, etc,
since they enhance their predictive capabilities. Unfortu-
nately, tables come in a large variety of shapes and sizes.
Furthermore, they can have complex column/row-header
configurations, multiline rows, different variety of separa-
tion lines, missing entries, etc. As such, the correct iden-
tification of the table-structure from an image is a non-
trivial task. In this paper, we present a new table-structure
identification model. The latter improves the latest end-to-
end deep learning model (i.e. encoder-dual-decoder from
PubTabNet) in two significant ways. First, we introduce a
new object detection decoder for table-cells. In this way,
we can obtain the content of the table-cells from program-
matic PDF's directly from the PDF source and avoid the
training of the custom OCR decoders. This architectural
change leads to more accurate table-content extraction and
allows us to tackle non-english tables. Second, we replace
the LSTM decoders with transformer based decoders. This
upgrade improves significantly the previous state-of-the-art
tree-editing-distance-score (TEDS) from 91% to 98.5% on
simple tables and from 88.7% to 95% on complex tables.

1. Introduction

The occurrence of tables in documents is ubiquitous.
They often summarise quantitative or factual data, which is
cumbersome to describe in verbose text but nevertheless ex-
tremely valuable. Unfortunately, this compact representa-
tion is often not easy to parse by machines. There are many
implicit conventions used to obtain a compact table repre-
sentation. For example, tables often have complex column-
and row-headers in order to reduce duplicated cell content.
Lines of different shapes and sizes are leveraged to separate
content or indicate a tree structure. Additionally, tables can
also have empty/missing table-entries or multi-row textual
table-entries. Fig. 1 shows a table which presents all these
issues.

<!-- image -->

Figure 1: Picture of a table with subtle, complex features
such as (1) multi-column headers, (2) cell with multi-row
text and (3) cells with no content. Image from PubTabNet
evaluation set, filename: 'PMC2944238_004_02'.

Recently, significant progress has been made with vi-
sion based approaches to extract tables in documents. For
the sake of completeness, the issue of table extraction from
documents is typically decomposed into two separate chal-
lenges, i.e. (1) finding the location of the table(s) on a
document-page and (2) finding the structure of a given table
in the document.

The first problem is called table-location and has been
previously addressed [30, 38, 19, 21, 23, 26, 8] with state-
of-the-art object-detection networks (e.g. YOLO and later
on Mask-RCNN [9]). For all practical purposes, it can be

considered as a solved problem, given enough ground-truth
data to train on.

The second problem is called table-structure decompo-
sition. The latter is a long standing problem in the com-
munity of document understanding [6, 4, 14]. Contrary to
the table-location problem, there are no commonly used ap-
proaches that can easily be re-purposed to solve this prob-
lem. Lately, a set of new model-architectures has been pro-
posed by the community to address table-structure decom-
position [37, 36, 18, 20]. All these models have some weak-
nesses (see Sec. 2). The common denominator here is the
reliance on textual features and/or the inability to provide
the bounding box of each table-cell in the original image.

In this paper, we want to address these weaknesses and
present a robust table-structure decomposition algorithm.
The design criteria for our model are the following. First,
we want our algorithm to be language agnostic. In this way,
we can obtain the structure of any table, irregardless of the
language. Second, we want our algorithm to leverage as
much data as possible from the original PDF document. For
programmatic PDF documents, the text-cells can often be
extracted much faster and with higher accuracy compared
to OCR methods. Last but not least, we want to have a di-
rect link between the table-cell and its bounding box in the
image.

To meet the design criteria listed above, we developed a
new model called TableFormer and a synthetically gener-
ated table structure dataset called SynthTabNet¹. In partic-
ular, our contributions in this work can be summarised as
follows:

- We propose TableFormer, a transformer based model
that predicts tables structure and bounding boxes for
the table content simultaneously in an end-to-end ap-
proach.

- Across all benchmark datasets TableFormer signif-
icantly outperforms existing state-of-the-art metrics,
while being much more efficient in training and infer-
ence to existing works.

- We present SynthTabNet a synthetically generated
dataset, with various appearance styles and complex-
ity.

- An augmented dataset based on PubTabNet [37],
FinTabNet [36], and TableBank [17] with generated
ground-truth for reproducibility.

The paper is structured as follows. In Sec. 2, we give
a brief overview of the current state-of-the-art. In Sec. 3,
we describe the datasets on which we train. In Sec. 4, we
introduce the TableFormer model-architecture and describe

¹https://github.com/IBM/SynthTabNet

its results & performance in Sec. 5. As a conclusion, we de-
scribe how this new model-architecture can be re-purposed
for other tasks in the computer-vision community.

2. Previous work and State of the Art

Identifying the structure of a table has been an outstand-
ing problem in the document-parsing community, that mo-
tivates many organised public challenges [6, 4, 14]. The
difficulty of the problem can be attributed to a number of
factors. First, there is a large variety in the shapes and sizes
of tables. Such large variety requires a flexible method.
This is especially true for complex column- and row head-
ers, which can be extremely intricate and demanding. A
second factor of complexity is the lack of data with regard
to table-structure. Until the publication of PubTabNet [37],
there were no large datasets (i.e. > 100K tables) that pro-
vided structure information. This happens primarily due to
the fact that tables are notoriously time-consuming to an-
notate by hand. However, this has definitely changed in re-
cent years with the deliverance of PubTabNet [37], FinTab-
Net [36], TableBank [17] etc.

Before the rising popularity of deep neural networks,
the community relied heavily on heuristic and/or statistical
methods to do table structure identification [3, 7, 11, 5, 13,
28]. Although such methods work well on constrained ta-
bles [12], a more data-driven approach can be applied due
to the advent of convolutional neural networks (CNNs) and
the availability of large datasets. To the best-of-our knowl-
edge, there are currently two different types of network ar-
chitecture that are being pursued for state-of-the-art table-
structure identification.

Image-to-Text networks: In this type of network, one
predicts a sequence of tokens starting from an encoded
image. Such sequences of tokens can be HTML table
tags [37, 17] or LaTeX symbols[10]. The choice of sym-
bols is ultimately not very important, since one can be trans-
formed into the other. There are however subtle variations
in the Image-to-Text networks. The easiest network archi-
tectures are "image-encoder → text-decoder” (IETD), sim-
ilar to network architectures that try to provide captions to
images [32]. In these IETD networks, one expects as output
the LaTeX/HTML string of the entire table, i.e. the sym-
bols necessary for creating the table with the content of the
table. Another approach is the "image-encoder → dual de-
coder" (IEDD) networks. In these type of networks, one has
two consecutive decoders with different purposes. The first
decoder is the tag-decoder, i.e. it only produces the HTM-
L/LaTeX tags which construct an empty table. The second
content-decoder uses the encoding of the image in combi-
nation with the output encoding of each cell-tag (from the
tag-decoder) to generate the textual content of each table
cell. The network architecture of IEDD is certainly more
elaborate, but it has the advantage that one can pre-train the

tag-decoder which is constrained to the table-tags.

In practice, both network architectures (IETD and
IEDD) require an implicit, custom trained object-character-
recognition (OCR) to obtain the content of the table-cells.
In the case of IETD, this OCR engine is implicit in the de-
coder similar to [24]. For the IEDD, the OCR is solely em-
bedded in the content-decoder. This reliance on a custom,
implicit OCR decoder is of course problematic. OCR is a
well known and extremely tough problem, that often needs
custom training for each individual language. However, the
limited availability for non-english content in the current
datasets, makes it impractical to apply the IETD and IEDD
methods on tables with other languages. Additionally, OCR
can be completely omitted if the tables originate from pro-
grammatic PDF documents with known positions of each
cell. The latter was the inspiration for the work of this pa-
per.

Graph Neural networks: Graph Neural networks
(GNN's) take a radically different approach to table-
structure extraction. Note that one table cell can consti-
tute out of multiple text-cells. To obtain the table-structure,
one creates an initial graph, where each of the text-cells
becomes a node in the graph similar to [33, 34, 2]. Each
node is then associated with en embedding vector coming
from the encoded image, its coordinates and the encoded
text. Furthermore, nodes that represent adjacent text-cells
are linked. Graph Convolutional Networks (GCN's) based
methods take the image as an input, but also the position of
the text-cells and their content [18]. The purpose of a GCN
is to transform the input graph into a new graph, which re-
places the old links with new ones. The new links then
represent the table-structure. With this approach, one can
avoid the need to build custom OCR decoders. However,
the quality of the reconstructed structure is not comparable
to the current state-of-the-art [18].

Hybrid Deep Learning-Rule-Based approach: A pop-
ular current model for table-structure identification is the
use of a hybrid Deep Learning-Rule-Based approach similar
to [27, 29]. In this approach, one first detects the position of
the table-cells with object detection (e.g. YoloVx or Mask-
RCNN), then classifies the table into different types (from
its images) and finally uses different rule-sets to obtain
its table-structure. Currently, this approach achieves state-
of-the-art results, but is not an end-to-end deep-learning
method. As such, new rules need to be written if different
types of tables are encountered.

3. Datasets

We rely on large-scale datasets such as PubTabNet [37],
FinTabNet [36], and TableBank [17] datasets to train and
evaluate our models. These datasets span over various ap-
pearance styles and content. We also introduce our own
synthetically generated SynthTabNet dataset to fix an im-

<!-- image -->

Figure 2: Distribution of the tables across different table
dimensions in PubTabNet + FinTabNet datasets

balance in the previous datasets.

The PubTabNet dataset contains 509k tables delivered as
annotated PNG images. The annotations consist of the table
structure represented in HTML format, the tokenized text
and its bounding boxes per table cell. Fig. 1 shows the ap-
pearance style of PubTabNet. Depending on its complexity,
a table is characterized as “simple" when it does not contain
row spans or column spans, otherwise it is "complex". The
dataset is divided into Train and Val splits (roughly 98% and
2%). The Train split consists of 54% simple and 46% com-
plex tables and the Val split of 51% and 49% respectively.
The FinTabNet dataset contains 112k tables delivered as
single-page PDF documents with mixed table structures and
text content. Similarly to the PubTabNet, the annotations
of FinTabNet include the table structure in HTML, the to-
kenized text and the bounding boxes on a table cell basis.
The dataset is divided into Train, Test and Val splits (81%,
9.5%, 9.5%), and each one is almost equally divided into
simple and complex tables (Train: 48% simple, 52% com-
plex, Test: 48% simple, 52% complex, Test: 53% simple,
47% complex). Finally the TableBank dataset consists of
145k tables provided as JPEG images. The latter has anno-
tations for the table structure, but only few with bounding
boxes of the table cells. The entire dataset consists of sim-
ple tables and it is divided into 90% Train, 3% Test and 7%
Val splits.

Due to the heterogeneity across the dataset formats, it
was necessary to combine all available data into one homog-
enized dataset before we could train our models for practi-
cal purposes. Given the size of PubTabNet, we adopted its
annotation format and we extracted and converted all tables
as PNG images with a resolution of 72 dpi. Additionally,
we have filtered out tables with extreme sizes due to small

amount of such tables, and kept only those ones ranging
between 1*1 and 20*10 (rows/columns).

The availability of the bounding boxes for all table cells
is essential to train our models. In order to distinguish be-
tween empty and non-empty bounding boxes, we have in-
troduced a binary class in the annotation. Unfortunately, the
original datasets either omit the bounding boxes for whole
tables (e.g. TableBank) or they narrow their scope only to
non-empty cells. Therefore, it was imperative to introduce
a data pre-processing procedure that generates the missing
bounding boxes out of the annotation information. This pro-
cedure first parses the provided table structure and calcu-
lates the dimensions of the most fine-grained grid that cov-
ers the table structure. Notice that each table cell may oc-
cupy multiple grid squares due to row or column spans. In
case of PubTabNet we had to compute missing bounding
boxes for 48% of the simple and 69% of the complex ta-
bles. Regarding FinTabNet, 68% of the simple and 98%
of the complex tables require the generation of bounding
boxes.

As it is illustrated in Fig. 2, the table distributions from
all datasets are skewed towards simpler structures with
fewer number of rows/columns. Additionally, there is very
limited variance in the table styles, which in case of Pub-
TabNet and FinTabNet means one styling format for the
majority of the tables. Similar limitations appear also in
the type of table content, which in some cases (e.g. FinTab-
Net) is restricted to a certain domain. Ultimately, the lack
of diversity in the training dataset damages the ability of the
models to generalize well on unseen data.

Motivated by those observations we aimed at generating
a synthetic table dataset named SynthTabNet. This approach
offers control over: 1) the size of the dataset, 2) the table
structure, 3) the table style and 4) the type of content. The
complexity of the table structure is described by the size of
the table header and the table body, as well as the percentage
of the table cells covered by row spans and column spans.
A set of carefully designed styling templates provides the
basis to build a wide range of table appearances. Lastly, the
table content is generated out of a curated collection of text
corpora. By controlling the size and scope of the synthetic
datasets we are able to train and evaluate our models in a
variety of different conditions. For example, we can first
generate a highly diverse dataset to train our models and
then evaluate their performance on other synthetic datasets
which are focused on a specific domain.

In this regard, we have prepared four synthetic datasets,
each one containing 150k examples. The corpora to gener-
ate the table text consists of the most frequent terms appear-
ing in PubTabNet and FinTabNet together with randomly
generated text. The first two synthetic datasets have been
fine-tuned to mimic the appearance of the original datasets
but encompass more complicated table structures. The third

| Tags | Bbox | Size | Format |
|---|---|---|---|
| PubTabNet | ✓ | ✓ | 509k | PNG |
| FinTabNet | ✓ | ✓ | 112k | PDF |
| TableBank | ✓ | X | 145k | JPEG |
| Combined-Tabnet(*) | ✓ | ✓ | 400k | PNG |
| Combined(**) | ✓ | ✓ | 500k | PNG |
| SynthTabNet | ✓ | ✓ | 600k | PNG |

Table 1: Both "Combined-Tabnet" and "Combined-
Tabnet" are variations of the following: (*) The Combined-
Tabnet dataset is the processed combination of PubTabNet
and Fintabnet. (**) The combined dataset is the processed
combination of PubTabNet, Fintabnet and TableBank.

one adopts a colorful appearance with high contrast and the
last one contains tables with sparse content. Lastly, we have
combined all synthetic datasets into one big unified syn-
thetic dataset of 600k examples.

Tab. 1 summarizes the various attributes of the datasets.

4. The TableFormer model

Given the image of a table, TableFormer is able to pre-
dict: 1) a sequence of tokens that represent the structure of
a table, and 2) a bounding box coupled to a subset of those
tokens. The conversion of an image into a sequence of to-
kens is a well-known task [35, 16]. While attention is often
used as an implicit method to associate each token of the
sequence with a position in the original image, an explicit
association between the individual table-cells and the image
bounding boxes is also required.

4.1. Model architecture.

We now describe in detail the proposed method, which
is composed of three main components, see Fig. 4. Our
CNN Backbone Network encodes the input as a feature vec-
tor of predefined length. The input feature vector of the
encoded image is passed to the Structure Decoder to pro-
duce a sequence of HTML tags that represent the structure
of the table. With each prediction of an HTML standard
data cell ('') the hidden state of that cell is passed to
the Cell BBox Decoder. As for spanning cells, such as row
or column span, the tag is broken down to '<', 'rowspan='
or 'colspan=', with the number of spanning cells (attribute),
and '>'. The hidden state attached to '<' is passed to the
Cell BBox Decoder. A shared feed forward network (FFN)
receives the hidden states from the Structure Decoder, to
provide the final detection predictions of the bounding box
coordinates and their classification.

CNN Backbone Network. A ResNet-18 CNN is the
backbone that receives the table image and encodes it as a
vector of predefined length. The network has been modified
by removing the linear and pooling layer, as we are not per-

<!-- image -->

Figure 3: TableFormer takes in an image of the PDF and creates bounding box and HTML structure predictions that are
synchronized. The bounding boxes grabs the content from the PDF and inserts it in the structure.

<!-- image -->

Figure 4: Given an input image of a table, the Encoder pro-
duces fixed-length features that represent the input image.
The features are then passed to both the Structure Decoder
and Cell BBox Decoder. During training, the Structure
Decoder receives 'tokenized tags' of the HTML code that
represent the table structure. Afterwards, a transformer en-
coder and decoder architecture is employed to produce fea-
tures that are received by a linear layer, and the Cell BBox
Decoder. The linear layer is applied to the features to
predict the tags. Simultaneously, the Cell BBox Decoder
selects features referring to the data cells (‘', '<') and
passes them through an attention network, an MLP, and a
linear layer to predict the bounding boxes.

forming classification, and adding an adaptive pooling layer
of size 28*28. ResNet by default downsamples the image
resolution by 32 and then the encoded image is provided to
both the Structure Decoder, and Cell BBox Decoder.

Structure Decoder. The transformer architecture of this
component is based on the work proposed in [31]. After
extensive experimentation, the Structure Decoder is mod-
eled as a transformer encoder with two encoder layers and
a transformer decoder made from a stack of 4 decoder lay-
ers that comprise mainly of multi-head attention and feed
forward layers. This configuration uses fewer layers and
heads in comparison to networks applied to other problems
(e.g. "Scene Understanding”, “Image Captioning"), some-
thing which we relate to the simplicity of table images.

The transformer encoder receives an encoded image
from the CNN Backbone Network and refines it through a
multi-head dot-product attention layer, followed by a Feed
Forward Network. During training, the transformer de-
coder receives as input the output feature produced by the
transformer encoder, and the tokenized input of the HTML
ground-truth tags. Using a stack of multi-head attention lay-
ers, different aspects of the tag sequence could be inferred.
This is achieved by each attention head on a layer operating
in a different subspace, and then combining altogether their
attention score.

Cell BBox Decoder. Our architecture allows to simul-
taneously predict HTML tags and bounding boxes for each
table cell without the need of a separate object detector end
to end. This approach is inspired by DETR [1] which em-
ploys a Transformer Encoder, and Decoder that looks for
a specific number of object queries (potential object detec-
tions). As our model utilizes a transformer architecture, the
hidden state of the ' and '<' HTML structure tags be-
come the object query.

The encoding generated by the CNN Backbone Network
along with the features acquired for every data cell from the
Transformer Decoder are then passed to the attention net-
work. The attention network takes both inputs and learns to
provide an attention weighted encoding. This weighted at-

tention encoding is then multiplied to the encoded image to
produce a feature for each table cell. Notice that this is dif-
ferent than the typical object detection problem where im-
balances between the number of detections and the amount
of objects may exist. In our case, we know up front that
the produced detections always match with the table cells
in number and correspondence.

The output features for each table cell are then fed
into the feed-forward network (FFN). The FFN consists
of a Multi-Layer Perceptron (3 layers with ReLU activa-
tion function) that predicts the normalized coordinates for
the bounding box of each table cell. Finally, the predicted
bounding boxes are classified based on whether they are
empty or not using a linear layer.

Loss Functions. We formulate a multi-task loss Eq. 2
to train our network. The Cross-Entropy loss (denoted as
ls) is used to train the Structure Decoder which predicts the
structure tokens. As for the Cell BBox Decoder it is trained
with a combination of losses denoted as lbox. lbox consists
of the generally used 11 loss for object detection and the
IoU loss (liou) to be scale invariant as explained in [25]. In
comparison to DETR, we do not use the Hungarian algo-
rithm [15] to match the predicted bounding boxes with the
ground-truth boxes, as we have already achieved a one-to-
one match through two steps: 1) Our token input sequence
is naturally ordered, therefore the hidden states of the table
data cells are also in order when they are provided as in-
put to the Cell BBox Decoder, and 2) Our bounding boxes
generation mechanism (see Sec. 3) ensures a one-to-one
mapping between the cell content and its bounding box for
all post-processed datasets.

The loss used to train the TableFormer can be defined as
following:
```
lbox = λdiouliou + λι1
ls + (1 – λ)lbox
```
where λ ∈ [0, 1], and λίου, λι1 ∈ R are hyper-parameters.

5. Experimental Results

5.1. Implementation Details

TableFormer uses ResNet-18 as the CNN Backbone Net-
work. The input images are resized to 448*448 pixels and
the feature map has a dimension of 28*28. Additionally, we
enforce the following input constraints:
```
Image width and height < 1024 pixels
Structural tags length < 512 tokens.
```
Although input constraints are used also by other methods,
such as EDD, ours are less restrictive due to the improved

runtime performance and lower memory footprint of Table-
Former. This allows to utilize input samples with longer
sequences and images with larger dimensions.

The Transformer Encoder consists of two "Transformer
Encoder Layers", with an input feature size of 512, feed
forward network of 1024, and 4 attention heads. As for the
Transformer Decoder it is composed of four "Transformer
Decoder Layers” with similar input and output dimensions
as the "Transformer Encoder Layers". Even though our
model uses fewer layers and heads than the default imple-
mentation parameters, our extensive experimentation has
proved this setup to be more suitable for table images. We
attribute this finding to the inherent design of table im-
ages, which contain mostly lines and text, unlike the more
elaborate content present in other scopes (e.g. the COCO
dataset). Moreover, we have added ResNet blocks to the
inputs of the Structure Decoder and Cell BBox Decoder.
This prevents a decoder having a stronger influence over the
learned weights which would damage the other prediction
task (structure vs bounding boxes), but learn task specific
weights instead. Lastly our dropout layers are set to 0.5.

For training, TableFormer is trained with 3 Adam opti-
mizers, each one for the CNN Backbone Network, Structure
Decoder, and Cell BBox Decoder. Taking the PubTabNet as
an example for our parameter set up, the initializing learn-
ing rate is 0.001 for 12 epochs with a batch size of 24, and
λ set to 0.5. Afterwards, we reduce the learning rate to
0.0001, the batch size to 18 and train for 12 more epochs or
convergence.

TableFormer is implemented with PyTorch and Torchvi-
sion libraries [22]. To speed up the inference, the image
undergoes a single forward pass through the CNN Back-
bone Network and transformer encoder. This eliminates the
overhead of generating the same features for each decoding
step. Similarly, we employ a 'caching' technique to preform
faster autoregressive decoding. This is achieved by storing
the features of decoded tokens so we can reuse them for
each time step. Therefore, we only compute the attention
for each new tag.

5.2. Generalization

TableFormer is evaluated on three major publicly avail-
able datasets of different nature to prove the generalization
and effectiveness of our model. The datasets used for eval-
uation are the PubTabNet, FinTabNet and TableBank which
stem from the scientific, financial and general domains re-
spectively.

We also share our baseline results on the challenging
SynthTabNet dataset. Throughout our experiments, the
same parameters stated in Sec. 5.1 are utilized.

5.3. Datasets and Metrics

The Tree-Edit-Distance-Based Similarity (TEDS) met-
ric was introduced in [37]. It represents the prediction, and
ground-truth as a tree structure of HTML tags. This simi-
larity is calculated as:
```
TEDS (Ta, To) = 1 –
EditDist (Ta, Τь)
max (|Ta|, |To|)
```
where Ta and To represent tables in tree structure HTML
format. EditDist denotes the tree-edit distance, and |T| rep-
resents the number of nodes in T.

5.4. Quantitative Analysis

Structure. As shown in Tab. 2, TableFormer outper-
forms all SOTA methods across different datasets by a large
margin for predicting the table structure from an image.
All the more, our model outperforms pre-trained methods.
During the evaluation we do not apply any table filtering.
We also provide our baseline results on the SynthTabNet
dataset. It has been observed that large tables (e.g. tables
that occupy half of the page or more) yield poor predictions.
We attribute this issue to the image resizing during the pre-
processing step, that produces downsampled images with
indistinguishable features. This problem can be addressed
by treating such big tables with a separate model which ac-
cepts a large input image size.

| Model | Dataset | Simple | Complex | All |
|---|---|---|---|---|
| EDD | PTN | 91.1 | 88.7 | 89.9 |
| GTE | PTN |  |  | 93.01 |
| TableFormer | PTN | 98.5 | 95.0 | 96.75 |
| EDD | FTN | 88.4 | 92.08 | 90.6 |
| GTE | FTN |  |  | 87.14 |
| GTE (FT) | FTN |  |  | 91.02 |
| TableFormer | FTN | 97.5 | 96.0 | 96.8 |
| EDD | TB | 86.0 |  | 86.0 |
| TableFormer | TB | 89.6 |  | 89.6 |
| Table Former | STN | 96.9 | 95.7 | 96.7 |

Table 2: Structure results on PubTabNet (PTN), FinTabNet
(FTN), TableBank (TB) and SynthTabNet (STN).
FT: Model was trained on PubTabNet then finetuned.

Cell Detection. Like any object detector, our Cell BBox
Detector provides bounding boxes that can be improved
with post-processing during inference. We make use of the
grid-like structure of tables to refine the predictions. A de-
tailed explanation on the post-processing is available in the
supplementary material. As shown in Tab. 3, we evaluate

our Cell BBox Decoder accuracy for cells with a class la-
bel of 'content' only using the PASCAL VOC MAP metric
for pre-processing and post-processing. Note that we do
not have post-processing results for SynthTabNet as images
are only provided. To compare the performance of our pro-
posed approach, we've integrated TableFormer's Cell BBox
Decoder into EDD architecture. As mentioned previously,
the Structure Decoder provides the Cell BBox Decoder with
the features needed to predict the bounding box predictions.
Therefore, the accuracy of the Structure Decoder directly
influences the accuracy of the Cell BBox Decoder. If the
Structure Decoder predicts an extra column, this will result
in an extra column of predicted bounding boxes.

| Model | Dataset | mAP | mAP (PP) |
|---|---|---|---|
| EDD+BBox | PubTabNet | 79.2 | 82.7 |
| TableFormer | PubTabNet | 82.1 | 86.8 |
| TableFormer | SynthTabNet | 87.7 | - |

Table 3: Cell Bounding Box detection results on PubTab-
Net, and FinTabNet. PP: Post-processing.

Cell Content. In this section, we evaluate the entire
pipeline of recovering a table with content. Here we put
our approach to test by capitalizing on extracting content
from the PDF cells rather than decoding from images. Tab.
4 shows the TEDs score of HTML code representing the
structure of the table along with the content inserted in the
data cell and compared with the ground-truth. Our method
achieved a 5.3% increase over the state-of-the-art, and com-
mercial solutions. We believe our scores would be higher
if the HTML ground-truth matched the extracted PDF cell
content. Unfortunately, there are small discrepancies such
as spacings around words or special characters with various
unicode representations.

| Model | Dataset | Simple | Complex | All |
|---|---|---|---|---|
| Tabula |  | 78.0 | 57.8 | 67.9 |
| Traprange |  | 60.8 | 49.9 | 55.4 |
| Camelot |  | 80.0 | 66.0 | 73.0 |
| Acrobat Pro |  | 68.9 | 61.8 | 65.3 |
| EDD |  | 91.2 | 85.4 | 88.3 |
| Table Former |  | 95.4 | 90.1 | 93.6 |

Table 4: Results of structure with content retrieved using
cell detection on PubTabNet. In all cases the input is PDF
documents with cropped tables.

<!-- image -->

Figure 5: One of the benefits of TableFormer is that it is language agnostic, as an example, the left part of the illustration
demonstrates TableFormer predictions on previously unseen language (Japanese). Additionally, we see that TableFormer is
robust to variability in style and content, right side of the illustration shows the example of the TableFormer prediction from
the FinTabNet dataset.

<!-- image -->

Figure 6: An example of TableFormer predictions (bounding boxes and structure) from generated SynthTabNet table.

5.5. Qualitative Analysis

We showcase several visualizations for the different
components of our network on various “complex" tables
within datasets presented in this work in Fig. 5 and Fig. 6
As it is shown, our model is able to predict bounding boxes
for all table cells, even for the empty ones. Additionally,
our post-processing techniques can extract the cell content
by matching the predicted bounding boxes to the PDF cells
based on their overlap and spatial proximity. The left part
of Fig. 5 demonstrates also the adaptability of our method
to any language, as it can successfully extract Japanese
text, although the training set contains only English content.
We provide more visualizations including the intermediate
steps in the supplementary material. Overall these illustra-
tions justify the versatility of our method across a diverse
range of table appearances and content type.

6. Future Work & Conclusion

In this paper, we presented TableFormer an end-to-end
transformer based approach to predict table structures and
bounding boxes of cells from an image. This approach en-
ables us to recreate the table structure
