# Differentially Private Set Union: Supplementary Materials

Sivakanth Gopi¹ Pankaj Gulhane¹ Janardhan Kulkarni¹ Judy Hanwen Shen 12 Milad Shokouhi ¹
Sergey Yekhanin 1

## A. Proofs of Policy Algorithms (Theorems 3.1 and 4.1)

Let D denote the collection of all databases. We say that D, D' ∈ D are neighboring databases, denoted by D ~ D', if they differ in exactly one user.

**Definition A.1.** For p > 0, the lp-sensitivity of f : D → Rk is defined as supp∼D' || f(D) − f(D')||e, where the supremum is over all neighboring databases D, D'.

The noise that we add is sampled either from Laplace or Gaussian (Normal) distribution. The probability density functions of these distributions are given by:

```
Lap(μ, λ) = Laplace(μ, λ) = 1/(2λ) exp(-|x - μ|/λ)
```

```
Ν(μ, σ²) = Normal(μ, σ²) = 1/(σ√(2π)) exp(-(x – μ)²/(2σ²))
```

We will need the following standard DP mechanisms.

**Proposition A.1** (The Laplace Mechanism (Dwork et al., 2006)). Suppose f : D → Rk is a function with l₁ sensi- tivity △1. For any ɛ ≥ 0, the Laplace mechanism M(x) = f(x) + (Y1, Y2, . . ., Yk) is (ɛ, 0)-DP when Y1, Y2, ..., Yk are i.i.d. random variables drawn from Lap(0, Δι/ε).

**Proposition A.2** (Gaussian Mechanism (Balle & Wang, 2018)). Suppose f : D → Rd is a function with 12- sensitivity A2. For any ɛ > 0 and δ ∈ [0, 1], the Gaussian mechanism M(x) = f(x) + Z with Z ~ N(0, σ2Ι) is (ε, δ)-DP if and only if

```
Φ((Δ2ε)/(2σ)) - е^ε Φ((-Δ2ε)/(2σ) - εσ) < δ
```

where I is the cdf of standard normal distribution.

*Equal contribution Microsoft Work done as part of the Microsoft AI Residency Program. Correspondence to: Sivakanth Gopi <sigopi@microsoft.com>, Janard- han Kulkarni <jakul@microsoft.com>, Judy Hanwen Shen <hashe@microsoft.com>.

**Definition A.2.** We say that two distributions P, Q on a domain X are (ε, δ)-close to each other, denoted by P ≈ε,δ Q, if for every SCX, we have

1.  Prx~P[x ∈ S] < e€ Prx~Q[x ∈ S] + d and
2.  Prx~Q[x ∈ S] < e€ Prx~p[x ∈ S] + δ.

We say that two random variables X, Y are (ε, δ)-close to each other, denoted by X ≈€,8 Y, if their distributions are (ε, δ)-close to each other.

We will need the following lemmas which is useful to prove (ε, δ)-DP.

**Lemma A.1.** Let P, Q be probability distributions over a domain X. If there exists an event E s.t. P(E) = 1 δ' and PE ≈€,8 Q, then P ≈ε,8+δι Q.

**Proof.** Fix some subset S ≤ X.

```
Pr[x ∈ S] = P(E) Pr[x ∈ S|E] + P[Ē] Pr[x ∈ S|E]
x~P
x~P
x~P
< P(E) + Pr[x ∈ S\E]
x~P
= δ' + Pr[x ∈ S]
x~PE
< δ' + e€ _Pr[x ∈ S] + δ
x~Q
```

We now prove the other direction.

```
Pr[x ∈ S] <e^ε Pr[x ∈ S] + d
x~Q
x~PE
< e^ε (Prx~P[x ∈ S])/(P(E)) + δ
= e^ε (Prxp[x ∈ S])/(1 - δ') + δ
= e^ε (Prxp[x ∈ S])/(1 - δ') + δ
```

Now if e Prx~P[x ∈ S] < 1 − δ', then we have Prx~Q[x ∈ S] < e€ Prz∼p[x ∈ S] + δ' + δ. Otherwise, trivially

```
Pr[x ∈ S] < 1 < e^ε Pr[x ∈ S] + δ' + δ.
x~Q
x~P
```

We will also need the fact that if X ≈€,8 Y, then after postprocessing they also remain (ε, δ)-close.

**Lemma A.2.** If two random variables X, Y are (ε, δ)-close and M is any randomized algorithm, then M(X) ≈ε,δ M(Y).

**Proof.** Let M(z) = F(z, R) for some function F where R is the random bits used by M. For any subset S of the possible outputs of M,

```
Pr[M(X) ∈ S] = Pr [F(X, R) ∈ S]
X,R
= ∑Pr[R = r] Px[F(X,r) ∈ S]
r
< ∑Pr[R = r] (e^ε Pr[F(Y,r) ∈ S] + δ)
r
= e^ε ∑Pr[R = r] Pr[F(Y,r) ∈ S] + δ
r
= e^ε Pr [F(Y, R) ∈ S] + δ.
X,R
```

The other direction holds by symmetry.

**Proof of Theorem 3.1.** Suppose D₁ and D2 are neighboring databases where D₁ has one extra user compared to D2. Let P and Q denote the distribution of output of the algorithm when the database is D₁ and D2 respectively. We want to show that P ≈ɛ,8 Q. Let E be the event that A C supp(H2).

**Claim A.1.** PE ≈€,0 Q

**Proof.** Let H₁ and H2 be the histograms generated by the algorithm from databases D₁ and D2 respectively. And H₁ and H2 be the histograms obtained by adding Lap(0,1/ε) noise to each entry of H₁ and H2 respectively. For any possible output A of Algorithm 4, we have

```
Q(A) = Pr[A = {u ∈ supp(H2) : Ĥ2[u] > PLap}] and
P|E(A) = Pr[A = {u ∈ supp(H2) : H₁[u] > PLap}].
```

So A ~ PE is obtained by postprocessing Ĥ1|E and A ~ Q is obtained by postprocessing H2. Since postpro- cessing only makes two distributions closer (Lemma A.2), it is enough to show that the distributions of the H1 supp(H2) and H2 are (€, 0)-close to each other. Because the histogram building algorithm (Algorithm 2) has l₁-sensitivity of at most 1 by hypothesis, ||H1|supp(H2) - H2||e, ≤ 1. There- fore PE ≈2,0 Q by the properties of Laplace mechanism (Proposition A.1).

By Lemma A.1, it is enough to show that P(E) ≥ 1 – δ. Let T = supp(H1) \ supp(H2). Note that |T| ≤ ∆o and H₁[u] ≤ for u ∈ Т.

```
P(Ē) = Pr[∃u ∈ T | Ĥ₁ [u] > PLap]
= 1 − Pr[Vu∈T H₁[u] ≤ PLap]
= 1 − [[ Pr[H₁[u] + Xu ≤ PLap]
UET
(Xu ~ Lap(1/8))
<1- [[ Pr[Xu ≤ PLap - (H₁[u] ≤ for u ∈ T)
UET
=1-(1-exp(-Eplap+))
```

Thus for

```
PLap ≥ max 1<t<Ao (1/ε + 1/t) log(2(1-(1-δ)^(1/t))):
```

we have P(E) < δ. Therefore the DP Set Union algorithm (Algorithm 1) is (ε, δ)-DP.

**Proof of Theorem 4.1.** Suppose D₁ and D2 are neighboring databases where D₁ has one extra user compared to D2. Let P and Q denote the distribution of output of the algorithm when the database is D₁ and D2 respectively. We want to show that P ≈ɛ,8 Q. Let E be the event that A C supp(H2).

**Claim A.2.** PE ≈ε,δ/2Q

**Proof.** Let H₁ and H2 be the histograms generated by the algorithm from databases D₁ and D2 respectively. And H₁ and H2 be the histograms obtained by adding N(0, σ²) noise to each entry of H₁ and H2 respectively. By the post- processing lemma (Lemma A.2), it is enough to show that the distributions of the H1 supp(H2) and H2 are (ε,δ/2)- close to each other. Because the histogram building algo- rithm (Algorithm 2) has l2-sensitivity of at most 1 by hy- pothesis, ||H1 supp(H2) - H2||e, ≤ 1. Therefore by proper- ties of Gaussian mechanism (Proposition A.2), it is enough to choose σ as in the statement of the theorem.

By Lemma A.1, it is enough to show that P(E) ≥ 1 – δ/2. Let T = supp(H1) \ supp(H2). Note that |T| ≤ ∆o and H₁[u] ≤ for u ∈ Т.
√T

```
P(E) = Pr[∃u ∈ T | H₁[u] > PGauss]
= 1 − Pr[∀u ∈T H₁[u] ≤ PGauss]
= 1 - [[ Pr[H₁[u] ≤ pGauss]
UET
= 1 − II Pr[H₁[u] + Xu ≤ PGauss]
UET
(Χι ~ Ν(0, σ²))
<1- [[ Pr[Xu ≤ PGauss - (H1[u] ≤ for u ∈ T)
UET
= 1 − ΠΦ
PGauss
1
σ
UET
√T
√T
```

Thus for

```
PGauss > max 1<t≤o (1/√t + σΦ-1(1-(1-δ)^(1/t)))
```

threshold p are chosen s.t.

```
Φ((ε√δ)/(2σ)) - е^ε Φ((-ε√δ)/(2σ) - εσ) < δ/2 and
```

```
p> max 1<t<Δο σΦ-1(1/t) (1+σΦ-1((1-δ)^(1/t)))
```

**Proof.** Proof of Theorem B.2 is extremely similar to the proof of Theorem 4.1. The only place where it differes is in Equation (2) where we bound H₁[u] < 1 instead of H₁[u] ≤ 1/√T.

## C. Proof of Lemma 4.1

<!-- image -->

**Figure 1.** Geometric explanation of Lemma 4.1 when |AB|, |AC| > 1.

**Proof of Lemma 4.1.** Let us first assume that both |AB|,|AC| > 1. Let 0 be the angle at A and let |AB| = x,|AC| = y as shown in Figure 1. Then by the cosine formula,

```
|BC|2 = |AB|2 + |AC|2 – 2|AB||AC| cos θ
= (x + 1)² + (y + 1)² – 2(x + 1)(y + 1) cos θ
= x² + y² + 2xy cos 0 + 2(x + y + 1)(1 − cos θ)
> x² + y² + 2xy cos θ
= |B'C'|2.
```

If |AB|, |AC| ≤ 1, then B' = C' = A and then the

<!-- image -->

**Figure 2.** Geometric explanation of Lemma 4.1 when |AB| > 1, |AC| ≤ 1.

claim is trivially true. Suppose |AB| > 1,|AC| ≤ 1. Now C' = A. Let |AB'| = x, |AC| = z < 1 and 0 be the angle at A as shown in Figure 2. Then by the cosine formula,

```
|BC|2 = |AB|2 + |AC|2 – 2|AB||AC| cos θ
= (x + 1)² + z2 − 2(x + 1)z cos 0
= x² + 2x(1 − z cos θ) + (z − cos θ)² + (1 − cos² θ)
> x² = |AB'\2 = |B'C'|2.
```

By symmetry, the claim is also true when |AC| > 1, |AB| ≤ 1.

## D. Privacy analysis of Weighted Laplace and Guassian Algorithms

### D.1. Weighted Laplace

```
Algorithm 1 LAPLACE weighted update
Input: H: Current histogram
W: A subset of U of size at most Δο
Output: H: Updated histogram
for u in W do
  H[u] ← H[u] + 1/|W|
end for
```

**Theorem D.1.** The WEIGHTED LAPLACE algorithm (Al- gorithm 1) is (ε, δ)-DP when

```
PLap ≥ max 1<t<Ao (1/ε + 1/t) log(1/2 (1-(1-δ)^(1/t))).
```

**Proof.** Proof is exactly the same as that of Theorem 3.1.

### D.2. Weighted Gaussian

```
Algorithm 2 GAUSSIAN weighted update
Input: H: Current histogram
W: A subset of U of size at most o
Output: H: Updated histogram
for u in W do
  H[u] ← H[u] + 1/√|W|
end for
```

**Theorem D.2.** The WEIGHTED GAUSSIAN algorithm (Al- gorithm 2) is (ε, δ)-DP if σ, ρGauss are chosen s.t.

```
Φ((ε√δ)/(2σ)) - е^ε Φ((-ε√δ)/(2σ) - εσ) < δ/2 and
```

```
Gauss > max 1<t≤o (σφ-1(1/t) + σΦ-1(1-(1-δ)^(1/t))).
```

**Proof.** Proof is exactly the same as that of Theorem 4.1.

## E. Greedy Policy

<!-- image -->

**Figure 3.** Visualization of greedy update example where the final 11 sensitivity is larger than 1.

In this section, we give a simple counter example to illustrate how the sensitivity of a greedy policy algorithm can be unbounded.

```
Algorithm 3 GREEDY POLICY update
Input: H: Current histogram
W: A subset of U of size at most o
Γ: cutoff parameter
Output: H: Updated histogram
// Build cost dictionary G
G = {} // Empty dictionary
for u ∈ W do
  if H[u] <Γ then
    // Gap to cutoff for items below cutoff Γ
    G[u] ← Г - H[u]
  end if
end for
// Each user gets a total budget of 1
budget ← 1
// Sort in increasing order of the gap Γ
G← sort(G)
// Let U1, U2, ..., U|G| be the sorted order
for j = 1 to |G| do
  if G[uj] < budget then
    H[uj] ← H[uj] + G[uj]
    budget ← budget - G[uj]
  else
    H[uj] ← H[uj]+ budget
    break
  end if
end for
```

Suppose there are N user let u₁ and u2 be two items in the universe. We will denote the weight of item u after user

i's contribution as H(i) [u]. Suppose user i has only item 41 while users i + 1, i + 2, ..., N have both items. Let H₁ be the histogram generated with all N users while H2 be the histogram generated without user i. Let A0 = 2 and H(i-1) [41] <H(i-1) [u2] < 1 + H(i-1) [41]. According to the greedy update described in Algorithm 3, in H1, user i will add weight 1 to u₁ and users i + 1, i + 2, ..., N will also to u₁ since H(i) [41] > H(i) [u2]. In H2, users i + 1, i + 2,..., N will add to u2 since H(i-1)[41] < H(i-1)[u2]. This process is described in figure 3. Therefore the l₁- sensitivity of the histogram built using Greedy Policy update (Algorithm 3) can be Ω(Γ, Ν).

## E. Dataset Details

Using a log-log scale, the frequency of users for each un- igram vs. the rank of the unigram is linear (Figure 4). In other words, the lowest ranked (most common) unigrams are used by almost all users while the highest ranked (least common) unigrams are used by very few users.

<!-- image -->

**Figure 4.** Frequency (i.e. number of users who use the unigram) vs. rank of the unigram (based on frequency) on a log-log scale. This linear relationship shows that the frequency of unigrams among users also follows Zipf's law (power law), i.e., count x 1/rankº° for some constant a > 0. The a in this case is ≈ 1.

The distribution of how many unigrams each user uses also follows a long tail distribution. While the top 10 users contribute between 850 and 2000 unique unigrams, most users (93.1%) contribute less than 100 unique unigrams. Table 1 summarizes the percentage of users with a unique vocabulary smaller than each threshold T provided.

| THRESHOLD (T) | USERS WITH Wi≤T |
| --- | --- |
| 1 | 2.78% |
| 10 | 29.82% |
| 50 | 79.16% |
| 100 | 93.13% |
| 300 | 99.59% |

## G. Additional Experiments

### G.1. Multiple passes through each user

In the experiments described thus far, each user contributes items once within the budget constraints. We also investi- gate whether the output of set union increases in size when each user contributes the same budget over multiple passes (e.g. user 1 contributes half of their budget each time over 2 passes), we compare POLICY LAPLACE and POLICY GAUS- SIAN outputs. Table 2 summarizes the results showing that there is not strong evidence suggesting that running multiple passes through the users improves the size of the output set.

### G.2. Selecting a: parameter to set threshold Γ

Figure 5 shows the number of unigrams released by POLICY LAPLACE and POLICY GAUSSIAN for various values of a. We observe that the number of unigrams released increases sharply until a = 4, then remains nearly constant and then slowly decreases. This choice of a only affects the policy algorithms since the weighted and count algorithms do not use a threshold.

<!-- image -->

**Figure 5.** Number of unigrams released for various values of a. The number of unigrams released increases sharply until about a = 2, then remains nearly constant and then decreases. Here we fixed Ao = 100 and 8 = 3.

|  | POLICY LAPLACE | POLICY GAUSSIAN |
| --- | --- | --- |
| Δο | 1 PASS | 2 PASSES | P-VAL | 1 PASS | 2 PASSES | P-VAL |
| 1 | 4236 ± 14 | 4257 ± 17 | 0.083 | 3135 ± 25 | 3131 ± 20 | 0.829 |
| 10 | 12452 ± 31 | 12389±17 | 0.008 | 10784 ± 22 | 10817±54 | 0.293 |
| 50 | 15056 ± 35 | 15080 ± 21 | 0.262 | 15763 ±33 | 15809 ± 45 | 0.139 |
| 100 | 14562 ± 50 | 14567 ± 24 | 0.846 | 14562 ± 50 | 14568 ±24 | 0.846 |
| 200 | 14005 ± 33 | 13979 ± 31 | 0.271 | 14005 ±33 | 13979±31 | 0.271 |
| 300 | 13702 ± 37 | 13678±47 | 0.448 | 13702 ± 37 | 13678±47 | 0.447 |

<!-- image -->

**Figure 6.** Number of unigrams released for various values of ɛ. Here we fixed Ao = 100 and a = 5.

We use & = 3 for the experiments in table 1. At this value of ɛ our policy algorithms perform much better than previous count and weighted algorithms. To check whether this result holds with smaller ɛ, we also run these algorithms on various values of 8. Figure 6 shows that for ɛ ≥ 1 our policy algorithms always perform better.

## References

Balle, B. and Wang, Y.-X. Improving the gaussian mecha- nism for differential privacy: Analytical calibration and optimal denoising. In *International Conference on Ma- chine Learning*, pp. 403–412, 2018.

Dwork, C., McSherry, F., Nissim, K., and Smith, A. Cali- brating noise to sensitivity in private data analysis. In *The- ory of Cryptography Conference*, pp. 265–284. Springer, 2006.
