# TOPOLOGY PROCEEDINGS

<!-- image -->

Volume 1, 1976
Pages 351-354

http://topology.auburn.edu/tp/

Research Announcement:
ON FREE TOPOLOGICAL GROUPS AND
FREE PRODUCTS OF TOPOLOGICAL
GROUPS

by
TEMPLE H. FAY AND BARBARA SMITH THOMAS

Topology Proceedings
**Web:** http://topology.auburn.edu/tp/
**Mail:** Topology Proceedings
Department of Mathematics & Statistics
Auburn University, Alabama 36849, USA
**E-mail:** topolog@auburn.edu
**ISSN:** 0146-4124
COPYRIGHTⓒ by Topology Proceedings. All rights reserved.

## ON FREE TOPOLOGICAL GROUPS AND FREE PRODUCTS OF TOPOLOGICAL GROUPS
(summary of results to appear elsewhere)

Temple H. Fay and Barbara Smith Thomas

In attempting to characterize the epimorphisms in the
category of Hausdorff topological groups, one is led to investi-
gating certain quotients of the free product G II G of a Haus-
dorff topological group with itself. In particular, one
wants to know if the amalgamated free product GII G, for a
closed subgroup B, is Hausdorff, or if its Hausdorff reflection
B
is "sufficiently large." To do this it seems useful to obtain
information about the topological structure of GU G, or more
generally of G I H for Hausdorff topological groups G and H.

Given any two topological groups (not necessarily Hausdorff)
G and H, their coproduct G II H in the category of topological
groups is G * H (their free product in the category of groups)
with the finest topology compatible with the group structure
making the injections GG I H + H continuous (Wyler). The
subgroup K of G I H generated by the reciprocal commutators
[g,h] = ghgh is a normal subgroup and is freely generated.
It is not difficult to show that every element of G I H has
a unique representation ghe with c∈ K, and if G and H are
Hausdorff then K is closed in GIH. Theorem 4 below shows
that if G and H are Hausdorff and if K can be given a suitable
topology, then G II H is Hausdorff.

Since K is freely generated we begin with a short investi-
gation of Graev free groups.

Defn: The Graev free topological group over a pointed
space (X,p) consists of a topological group F(X,p) and a base
G
point preserving continuous function η: (X,p) → F(X,p) with the
G

usual unique factorization property

<!-- image -->

(the base point of a group is the identity, f is continuous and
preserves base points, the induced f is a continuous group homo-
morphism, and the diagram commutes).

Theorem (Wyler): The underlying group of F(X,p) is the
G
free group on X\{p}, and F(X,p) has the finest topology compati-
G
ble with the group structure such that n:X + F (X,p) is continu-
ous.
G

Theorem (Ordman): If X is a k-space¹ then F(X,p) has the
weak topology generated by the subsets [F(X,p)In words of
reduced length < n.
G

Theorem 1: F(X,p) is Hausdorff if and only if x is func-
tionally Hausdorff.

Theorem 2: F(X,p) contains X as a closed subspace if and
only if X is Tychonoff.

Theorem 3: If X is Tychonoff and Y is a closed subspace
of X containing the base point then the subgroup of F(X,p) gen-
erated by Y is closed.

We now turn to considering the topological structure of
GII H for Hausdorff groups G and H.

Theorem 4: In order that GII H have a Hausdorff group

¹x is a k-space if it is the weak sum of countably many com-
pact Hausdorff spaces.

topology it is necessary and sufficient that KG II H have a
Hausdorff group topology, no finer than, but comparable to, the
topology of F(GA H,e) such that ψ: (G × H) × ΚΚ, where
G
ψ(g,h,c) = ghch-1g-1, is continuous.

Note: the need for the continuity of shows up a number
of times in the proof of this theorem, of which the simplest
example is (ghc)-1 = g-1h-1 (hgh-lg-1) ) (ghc-1h-1g-1)
= g-1h-1[g,h]-14(g,h,c-1)

Ordman's Theorem above says roughly "If X is a k-space
W
and something is true for words of length < n, for all n, then
it is true for F(X,p). Thus
G

Corollary (Katz): If G and H are k kw-spaces, then G II H
is Hausdorff.

The essential observation in the proof is that for all n
:(G × H)
X
[FG(G ^ H,ē] + FG(G ^ H,e) is continuous.
n

We conclude with a few observations. The first answers a
question of Morris, Ordman, and Thompson in the negative.

Observation 1: G ^ Hand [G,H] ⊆ G I H need not have
the same topology: In X = (ω,+1)
X
w₁ the two closed sets
A = {(x,x)\wo ≤ x < w₁} and B = ((1+1) × {1}) U {{w₁} x w₁)
cannot be separated by open sets. Let G = FG(w₁+1,w₁) and
H = F(ω,,1). Then X is a closed subset of G x H, A is closed
G 1
in G × H and B = x ∩ ((G × {e}) U ({e} × H)). Hence A and
(G X {e}) U ({e} ) × H) cannot be separated by open sets. It
follows that G ^ H is not even regular, and thus cannot be a
subspace of G II H.

Observation 2: The method of proof used in the corollary
2G
G^ His the quotient of G x H obtained by collapsing
(G × {e}) ең}) U ({eG} × H) to a point, this collapsed point is
denoted by e.

above cannot be used in the general case since F F(0,0) does not
have the weak topology generated by the words of length < n, and
Q = 0^{0,1}.

Obersvation 3: We cannot even replace FG(GAH,ē) by
FG(B(GH),) to obtain a proof of the general case since
(Q×Q) × × F(β(QQ),0) FG(β (Q does not have the weak topology gener-
ated by the subsets (Q× Q)
X
[FG(β(QQ), n

Partial Bibliography
1. M. I. Graev, *Free topological groups*, Izv. Akad. Nauk.
SSSR Ser. Mat. 12 (1948), 279-324, (Russian). Eng.
Transl.: Amer. Math. Soc. Transl. 35 (1951), Reprint
Amer. Math. Soc. Transl. (1) 8 (1962), 305-364.
2. , *On free products of topological groups*, Izv.
Akad. Nauk. SSSR Ser. Mat. 14 (1950), 343-354, (Russian).
3. E. Katz, *Free Topological groups and principal fiber
bundles*, Duke Journal 42 (1975), 83-90.
4. *Free products in the category of k -groups*,
Pacific J. 59 (1975) 493-495.
5. S. Morris, E. T. Ordman, and H. B. Thompson, *The topology
of free products of topological groups*, Proc. Second
Internat. Conf. on Group Theory, Canberra, 1973, 504-515.
6. E. Ordman, *Free products of topological groups which are
k-spaces*, Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 191 (1974), 61-73.
7. , *Free k-groups and free topological groups*, Gen.
Top. and Its Appl. 5 (1975), 205-219.
8. B. V. S. Thomas, *Free topological groups*, Gen. Top. and
Its Appl. 4 (1974), 51-72.
9. O. Wyler, *Top categories and categorical topology*, Gen.
Top. and Its Appl. 1 (1971), 17-28.

University of Cape Town
Cape Town, South Africa

Memphis State University
Memphis, Tennessee 38112
